Session 002 - Devotional Ideas and Thoughts a


LCRL (Lutheran Center for Religious Liberty) has a primary, guiding passage of Scripture.  Turn in your Bibles to 1 Peter 2: 15-17.  Let’s spend a little bit of time with these Words once again to kick off our first time together and we’ll concentrate a another one of the phrases in this text: 

“For this is the will of God, that by doing good you should put to silence the ignorance of foolish people. Live as people who are free, not using your freedom as a cover-up for evil, but living as servants of God. Honor everyone. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the emperor” (1 Peter 2:15–17).

Dr. Gregory Seltz used to teach future pastors at one of our universities, and one time he shared what he would often hear his students say, “I want to be called.” He would ask them, “What does that mean?” They would respond,  “Well, it means I can get health insurance, you know, the Concordia Plans.”  In fact his students would have a whole list of all the things they would get, if they had a Call, a call into the parish ministry or teaching ministry!” Dr. Seltz would alsys say, “Well, those things you get, like health insurance, eye-care, dental, etc., but that's because your church loves you and appreciates your willingness to sacrifice a good portion of your life for the ministry. But, none of that is part of the deal, biblically.”
Being called means something very different. The early church had a phrase- “where the bishop is, there is the church.” Today, since we live in such freedom, people think that means wherever the bishop's chair is. In those days, people were so scared to be public Christians, the bishop was basically the only public Christian. If you knew a place had a bishop, then you knew the church was there somewhere. Dr. Seltz teaches us that what it means to be called in the early church was that you were going to be the last people to be the public voices of the gospel when all hell breaks loose. 
So let me ask you, do you want to be called? 
To be willing to be called takes courage.  Through such a vocation other people will be saved, just because you have the courage to be yourself when all hell breaks loose. 
1 Peter tells us to “live as people who are free, not using your freedom as a cover up for evil, but living as servants of God.” When we understand what it really means to be called to be the voice of the gospel, not only for pastors but in each of our vocations, we can use the freedom we have in Christ to live as servants of God. 
The vocation of Champion, being a champion for religious liberty, is a courageous one. It is a person who will not be silent in the face of evil.  You know if you see something that isn’t right, and we stay silent, afraid for ourselves, that’s a cover up for evil.  
Let’s pray for bravery, courage, and inspiration from the LORD for our Christian convictions.  So that the freedom that we have enjoyed in Christ and the liberties that are ours to stewards in America might have a chance of surviving unto the next several generations, by God’s grace and power. 
Heavenly Father, you have given us the greatest freedom ever imagined in the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.  Nothing and no one can take that kind of freedom away from us. Lord, thank you for the grace that has been extended to us temporally through our US Consistitution, a government of the people, by the people and for the people.  We have so many liberties because of the spirit of eternal freedom afforded us in Jesus.  Help us to be good stewards of our temporal liberties, not for ourselves, but for others.  Give us the courage and the bravery and the fellowship of one another in Christ to not be silent should silence hurt others.  Help us retrain the freedoms so necessary for a clear and constant proclamation of the Gospel.  For Jesus’ sake. Amen 

