# **Building the Champions Network 4 parts**

## **Part 1**

Today on our program, Reverend Mark Frith, director of the Champions for Liberty Network of the LCRL. Welcome, Mark.  
Hey, Greg. Thanks for having me today.  
Listen, before we get into the question, uh, why a Champions for Liberty network of churches uh, and Christians like why do we need that? Um just just give a quick summation of what is this thing called the Champions for Liberty Network and what then we'll get into why why it's needed today.  
Absolutely Greg. Well, this uh the Champions for Religious Network is a brainchild of the LCRL and it's an opportunity to uh help the church, helping Christians to stand up and stand in the gap of issues related to our religious liberty and sanctity. life and marriage as an institution and uh also education reform. And so it's for men and women to to grow stronger, to understand, to learn, to have conversations with each other so that they're better prepared to have those conversations in the midst of their friendship groups, their work groups, uh when they're meeting as neighbors together, uh uh areas of which often times we tend to avoid those  
in our personal conversations. And so what would it be like to actually come alongside of the church and her Christians and her members and help her to extend uh the good news of Christ and what it means to be a two kingdom citizen in our world today. That's really the champions network. Wow. That I mean that's amazing. And you know I always try to tell people this is different than evangelism you know in the sense that you know we have a lot of organizations that will teach you how to share your faith, teach you how to do these things. This is actually an organization that is designed to teach you well it's an organization that is defending your freedom to be that evangelist without government coercion to the contrary and then you're saying too and then we've also got to realize you know we've got to develop our voice in that arena too because sometimes people think oh this is just politicizing the church and we're going to rebut that in a little bit but but again this is a network to support people to be two kingdom citizens I like that all right but here's the question why is this needed didn't it didn't seem like it was needed 50 or 100 years ago. Maybe I'm wrong, but why is it needed today?  
You know, you you say 50 years ago to 100 years ago, that's probably right, spot on. But if you go back 50 years and kind of walk through the decades, we've been through a lot of massinations when it comes to culture and things that have happened. And then, you know, we've been walking this thing through where it comes to Christianity and the church's institution and uh the applying trust in institutional church and other things and now we've been in the last you know 101 15 years this whole identity ideology debate and so uh and it's a sense where I've heard you say this and I've sensed this myself where you know the church and and when you talk about everyday men and women and Christians who are there we're being told what we can say and what we can't say and that goes directly to religious liberty kinds of issues and that's only ing further. You know, the church has enough on its hands, I would say, with when you talk about pastors, teachers, church leaders, and the like, in order to just continue to bless the church and understanding God's message and Christ's gift to us and what that means, and how to I've heard you say this before, how how the church is an important place where you come to learn how to love people that you may not like. Sorry, I stole that, but I've loved that. I've used that several times the last couple months.  
Yeah, because Christ gathers us, right? on and people kind of smile when I share saying hey my boss says this and they go oh that uh is so right. So there is um you know we've often thought in terms of cultural wars  
uh the battle lines and the fronts that have taken these various massinations um and so man this is the time when we start taking this stuff seriously as if we didn't before. I know we did but again as the church kind of gotten the feeling that we should be rather quiet when it comes to issues that are spoken of in the public square and political settings and the like.  
Yeah. You know, I people say and and I think I threw that out there just to kind of hint at the fact that this really has only arisen in the last several years, but people forget that Walter Meyer and those of you who are Lutheran listening in today, Walter Meyer was at one time the most recognizable religious voice on radio in America. Period. Nobody was bigger. And uh They tried to kick him off the air in the 40s. So, there was a group of people that came to the FCC and said, "He preaches too much about Jesus alone. He needs to be more religious and more generic. He needs to talk more than just about Jesus." And he said, "No, it's Jesus. Jesus only Jesus." They tried to kick him off legally. And so, the question I was asking is, well, what should Walter Meer have done? Should he have said, "Well, that's government. That's the, you know, that's public square. We don't have anything to do with it." No, he fought back. He used Jeffersonian freedom principles of the first amendment. We've dealt with this stuff before. And I guess I say it this way. There is a culture war. There's no doubt about it. But Christ's kingdom always is at war with the kingdoms of this world to some degree or in tension with him. I don't care whether we win or lose. I care whether we engage uh for the sake of the culture and for the sake of the mission of the church. And what's happening today is the criminalization uh of the Christian worldview or the biblical worldview. And I always tell people it's to share your faith when they make, you know, its mere pronouncement illegal. So, political correctness is being codified in law. Uh people used to say things like, "Don't make a federal case out of it." Today, everything seems to be a federal case, right?  
It certainly does, doesn't it? Uh everybody's make  
making mountains out of mole hills, but it's those moles that will tear up your whole front lawn and backyard.  
I've got them doing it right now. In fact, right after this program, I am outside. stomping. Now I know what that whack-a-ole game is all about.  
Yeah, the politization of conscience. Who would have ever thought that that would happen in America? And and isn't that what a lot of the laws see that's what we're fighting? We're fighting making your conscience expression or your worship illegal. We're fighting that now in America, even though we have this thing called the First Amendment. Talk about some of those things that are actually happening.  
Well, it used to we used to be all up in the air about political correctness, right, and language. And now that we look back at that, at least I look back at that and I think, "Wow, that was  
almost anemic." Uh, was just something that we bantered around. And yet, now look where that has come. And again, none of this has really happened quickly. If you, uh, look back through time, just the last few decades, all of this stuff has been sort of been sewn into the ground and we see that, uh, arising now. But yeah, so quite plainly, just take a look at the lawsuits that have mounted in the last 10, 15 years. I mean, you've got uh Jack Phillips, the cake baker. You've got Lorie Smith with 303 Creative, and I know you've talked about those in recent episodes, at least at the time of this airing. You know, the one that always got me was Baron all Stozman. I I I always tell people he was a grandmother, beloved in her community by everybody, and even the gay community loved her, too, in spite of the fact that they differed on views of marriage. It wasn't even the neighborhood that brought the lawsuit. It was some state department that heard that she refused to uh actually put, you know, her flower shop didn't do the the wedding kind of thing and they bankrupted her.  
Yes.  
They bankrupted a grandmother. I said to people, how in the world can you say that this is a good thing? So again, so politization of conscience were actually people's conscience issues. And I would just say, let's keep it this way. The the the scripture moral perspective says no to certain behaviors. Well, we're saying if you say no to any moral behavior, that demonstrates that you that you have a hateful view of things and there's laws on the books now in Michigan that's going to make that kind of stuff illegal. So, our work is to is basically just to keep the state in its proper place. That that's really all we're doing, guys. If you we're not trying to make we're actually trying to take politics out of a lot of these issues so you can share your faith and you can be authentic neighbors to one another. So the but the LCRL says we're going to have to stand on a few issues and we're going to have to say this far and no farther for the sake of the culture and for the sake of the mission. Um and I think you're saying that the LCRL and the Champions Network is going to teach people what those issues are and how to do that. So let's start with what are those fundamental issues uh that the LCRL Champions Network is going to stand on? uh publicly for the sake of the culture.  
Oh, sure. And and what I like about the brainchild of the champions network and something that you know has flown from your work already over the last six years and been practice some of some of these things uh or a lot of these things I should say is you're going to come alongside and walk with the church and walk with Christians in those areas along these four areas. Um the first of which kind of defines all of them in some way but it stands alone and that's just the religious liberty tenant. was born right at the beginning of by our founders you know uh James Madison who spoke that's one of the the first and foremost the greatest property any human being can have is the ability to speak one's conscience and one's belief that becomes important today because that's kind of where the everything is centering today doesn't take too much to look around and you can look deeply and you uh not look too far I should say and you'll see the number of people that are being uh held up in court when it comes to these things. I mentioned some of those to you just earlier. Uh  
yeah, let me jump in on that too and just say folks, you need to understand that some of the people that have been brought into court over their conscience proclamations on marriage or sex or gender or any of those kind of things. Some of them have gone they've been fighting for seven 8 years. Uh Lorie Smith has not been able to actually run her business for seven years because of this. Uh I don't know how many of you can survive seven years. without working. Uh but the process in some ways becomes the punishment. But I love what you said, religious liberty and conscience. Folks, even the pursuit of happiness to the founders it was pursuit of virtuous happiness based on a moral perspective, self-governance. They were just saying free people should be able to self-disipline and self-govern. And they thought the ten commandments were that foundational authority that would help you do that. And the last place you wanted was to be forced by the government to be a good citizen. It would be much better if you could live virtuous lives freely for the sake of others. That's what's being attacked today. And religious liberty says we would we want to protect rights of conscience and then we believe the word of God has the power to defend itself in the public square for the sake of others. All right. What's Well, the next one you said was sanctity of life. Why is that so important for us to defend for everybody?  
Well, just first and foremost, respect simply speaking to uh human dignity if you will that's the sanctity of this right that in fact the value that who we are is that God has actually given us each of us were created in his image and then redeemed by his own son Christ Jesus and uh what a gift that is that first and foremost that God recognizes you as valuable to this to this life and to this world  
you know you think people really understand that's what we're fighting for though. Do you think they actually think that about our our view on these things?  
I I don't think they a lot of people give that a second thought. No.  
Okay.  
All right. I mean, I think people are just trying to make their way through life and they're trying to skinny through it and without causing too much uh commotion. I think that's kind of the basics of when it comes to life. I mean, you're born, you get an education, you get a job, and you live the best that you can, and then you're done.  
Well, I just think too You know, people forget that in the whole DOD's case, it wasn't just about abortion versus not abortion. I mean, that's what people think it was about. It's about does the state have the power to declare certain innocent life as not worth living. That's the main issue. That's the main issue. Sanctity of life. And so what we were saying is the state never has the power to declare innocent human life as not worth living, which means it can be then dispensed of. like, you know, stepping on an ant, stepping on, you know, and and that's the issue, folks. And and so once the state can say, well, the life in the womb, that's dispensable, you know, disposable, then they can say, well, let's see, you're at the end of your productive life. Uh, that's disposable. And then maybe in the middle, you've got this idiotic ideology and you're disposable. And that was what the whole Nazi regime was about. There's certain lives that are not worth living. And once the state becomes the arbiter of that, the founders said, "No, you're created in the image of God and therefore you have inalienable rights that the state cannot take away and the sanctity of life goes right to the heart of that.  
It absolutely does. I mean if you take that away what have you got left  
and then yeah then what are we actually fighting for in all of this stuff? Well those Yeah. Go ahead.  
No I was just going to say that uh this actually speaks back to religious liberty once again that and the God who bestows that gift and calls you who you are and gives you purpose in life. There was a study done recently and uh forgetting just exactly who the author was, maybe it was a group of them that talked about if you take away uh the transcendent, if you take away God out of the mix, human beings really struggle and any sense of purpose period  
and really any sense of reason. And when you take that away from human beings, that sense of dignity and that sanctity of life, there's not much left to live for.  
Well, and that's a great tragedy.  
And I think we're seeing that. I mean, a lot of the these issues about violence and things like that. When you get to a point where you don't see other people as human beings, uh you're then violence becomes an easy thing to do because there's really no guilt in it whatsoever. All right. Well, the last two um so those first two we're defending it seems like because we're defending it for everybody. We're actually trying to say even if you disagree with us, we're defending this for you, too. The last two though, marriage as an institution and educational freedom, we're defending that. But That's really not that's more of a religious liberty issue for us though really isn't it?  
It is true. It is true when you take think about it marriage as institution a traditional biblical understanding of what that is  
right  
u that's God's gift again to us but truly can be a blessing to others as well right and you talk about a marriage institution marriage between uh one man one one woman  
yeah  
uh and the gift of what that means and what it has the potential to produce by God's giving and the like. You break down the family. Uh you begin to break down uh the rudiments of society. It's more than just about relationships.  
Yeah. See, and I think that's what you just hit on that. You know, we've reduced marriage now to just a relationship. But here's again the thing. Here's what we're doing. We don't think the government it really probably isn't their business to define what marriage is at all. Well, unless the the natural biological reality of it because there's something ally unique about a male and a female compared to all other relationships. Uh no matter what your view of marriage is. But if if anything what we're saying is the state does not have the right to tell the church what marriage is in any way, shape or form. And that is what is happening today. The church churches, schools, preschools are being knuckled under Christian ministries. There's a law in Oregon right now that says if you believe that marriage is only between a man and a woman, you cannot adopt a child in Oregon. Folks, this is this is ludicrous because a family the healthiest place for a child to grow up is with his mom and dad. That's psychologically true. That's sociologically true. That's theologically true. And now we're being told if you believe that, you cannot adopt children in the state of Oregon. Th this just seems to be kind of lunacy. And so all we're saying is even if you disagree with our view of marriage, which you have every right to do, don't make us have to say what we know not to be true. Especially biblically and all those other things. So that's a religious liberty issue. And then education, I think that's going to be a big issue in the days to come. But that goes to parents rights to educate their kids in the virtues that are necessary to take these facts and make them wisdom. Um we're defending that. That's going to be a big one, don't you think?  
I think you're absolutely right. And I know you've spoken on this on your program uh several times when it comes to this, but it is when it comes to the raising of their children uh education towards truth  
at a time when within the various studies of education science being one of those and now suddenly we're pitting science against other things it isn't just religion which I find fascinating because the church kind of gave birth not just kind of gave birth gave birth to many of the studies including science  
and now what we're hearing just in the you know the gender ideology debates you know how now science and psychology are being pitted against each other, you know.  
Yeah. Actually, science be damned in these debates. I mean, that's  
isn't that something?  
Yeah. XXXY that doesn't mean anything anymore. And isn't that amazing because we were told during co trust the scientists and I was like, which which one? Because there was a couple of radically disagreeing. We're finding out that one one side was actually being punished for their good science. Um, but back to this. So, educational freedom, we're we're really again and saying we have the right to be able to educate our children and that's going to there's a war zone there because um public education is owned by a couple of lobbies and it's owned by certain constituents and there's a sense where people are saying I don't know that I want my children growing up in that secularist view of humanity and I would even argue the American experiment is at war with that too because the founders document the Declaration of Independ and said that our freedoms depend on the knowledge that we're created in the image of God. Well, the public education system is at war with that today. Um, so those are the four and maybe in the programs to come we'll talk a little bit more about why we're limiting our engagement of those issues. Folks, I would just tell you we're trying to take politics out of a lot of these issues, but there's groups that are making everything political. So, we have to deal with it or our voice will be silenced not only in the public square, but even among our own people and even in our own communities. And we just can't have that because we have a mission that God has given us. And that's what I want to close with today. Mark, first of all, I just got to tell you, it's great to have you on board. It is great that you are the Champions Network director because already our people are going to have resources that they haven't had before. And if you tune into the programs for the rest of the month, you're going to see what I mean by that. Uh it's an exciting thing, this network, because the churches need to realize they're not by themselves in the middle of all this. But in closing, I want to focus on that last challenge, which is why is defending the church's public voice vital to our church's ultimate mission, which is evangelism. It's not either or. This is a bothand thing. And sometimes I think we've let other people fight these public battles uh for the sake of evangelism. Now, I guess God is laying that on all of us. Talk about that a little bit because that's still a little that's part of people's hesitation for for getting involved with the LCRL in all of its uh efforts.  
Well, it's a really really great question. Good sum. I'll try to do that quickly. You know, it's really to understand it comes down to this that what it means for us as Christians and for others if if they're open to that, but for Christians to understand what it means to be two kingdom citizens, two kingdom people in this world. The fact that God actually uh works specifically in our world both to save and to preserve, but that God has uh called us and knit us and redeemed us into this world. Uh, one to proclaim and to witness to the good news of Jesus Christ that saves people, changes the trajectory of their life, not just for now, but for all eternity, but then also to be able to uh speak of uh what it means to be a people of order and what it means to know the bounds that God says when he says no, that he also says yes to these things so that we might flourish when it comes to that. So, as Christians, we have dual citizenship, kingdom of God for all eternity, but also for this time that we might serve in living it out that faith and that hope  
and hopefulness even in the midst of our temporal bounds here on earth that others might come to maybe one day see him, but for this time at least enjoy the greatest of all gifts that you might have here in this world for this time.  
You know, I I like to say it too, and you said it well, folks. God is at work. I mean, that's the point. point. But he works two different ways. He works to preserve his world and to save his world. Maybe again we could say it this way. He preserves the world so that you can hear uh that he has saved the world freely. Um so Jesus says it this way, give to Caesar what is Caesars and give to God what is God's. But um then he tells us what Caesar's role is in Romans 13, you know. So keep Caesar in his proper place because Caesar is not going to save you. Uh so law and gospel, those are two different words. They're both God's words, but They function differently. His preserving work and his saving work, those are both God's work, but they function differently. He civilizes our world even as he saves our world. And those are both blessings to us. So Mark, you're teaching us how to keep those things differentiated properly so we might be useful in God's hands. What a great thing this network can be and will be for our churches. So how can people learn more about the Champions Network?

### **Part 2**

oday on our program, we're in August and we're talking about the Champions for Liberty Network of the LCRL and we are privileged to have on our program the director Reverend Mark Frith. But Mark, I was just thinking about it. You're you're coming up I guess in a couple of months you'll be on board for about a year. So, How are you enjoying it? And how, you know, tell me a little bit about I mean, you're coming to grips with a a whole new way of looking at blessing the church. You're helping the church defend its public voice in the public square. Um, also for the sake of the mission of the church, but you're I I like to say now that I'm I'm like an offensive lineman on a football team. I'm blocking all the time so that you evangelists can score. And the reality is it's not a that's not the sex work that you know offensive linemen even when they score touchdowns, right? They're probably on their backs,  
right? Right.  
So, tell me what you think because you kind of came out of you're a pastor and you I know you you've been an evangelist. You've worked for Lutheran Arm Ministries and and you you've been the kind of person who's always trying to find a way to share the good news of the gospel with Christ of Christ with others. And now you're blocking for those people so they can do it. So, tell me a little bit about your sojourn now for this almost uh about 10 months or so of being the Champions Network director.  
Well, you've graced me with the time to be able to uh sink my teeth and my eyes and my brain and immerse myself in the stuff that you've been working at for I could say seven years, but I think you've been working on this stuff even before that in your own way. And so, it's a different perspective for sure. And at times it feels like you're going back on your back because all you're trying to do is block. But  
every play, folks, Uh it is, but it's only just the beginning. And so uh it's the opportunity to uh uh to be a blessing to the church and for uh others to come alongside of us and also be that same blessing.  
Well, listen folks too, if you're some of you are gifted to be good blockers, you know, some of you are not the evangelist types in the church, you know, pastors, teachers, DCs, everyone is a witness, don't get me wrong. But the point is some of you are good at blocking though. And and blocking opening up that so that they can run for a touchdown and share the gospel or protecting the quarterback from getting sacked so that he can preach and teach the good news of the gospel so that all can hear. That is a blessing and that is God's work too. I think that's what people don't really understand. That's part of God's preserving work for the sake of his saving work. So today we're going to talk more about that. What this Champions for Liberty network is, what it's all about, and how it serves the church. And we are both citizens and evangelists and and differentiating those things as part of God's work. Talk a little bit about that uh in to introduce us to this Champions for Liberty network.  
Well, thanks again, Greg. Um yeah, the Champions for Religious Liberty. I liked your analogy of the offensive line and the like. And  
I'm not the offensive line coach now. I'm not even blocking.  
Well, I block a little bit.  
Well, right. Well, and it's I guess like offensive blind people, they tend to they grow them big. And so the opportunity for the uh champions network is to grow something up to come alongside of one another, stand alongside of your pastors and your teachers, alongside of the church and and others who have that ability to do some things maybe that you don't, but we're in this thing together. We're people who come to stand in the gap, stand up into the gap, help to balance the tensions, uh and if you will, to call out the powers that be when they overstep their authority or responsibility. That's the opportunity we're seeing as we're seeing all kinds of various cultural issues before us uh and have had for a while, but maybe like this is the time like no other. And so having uh an organization like the Champion Church for Liberty is going to be really important for the coming years, maybe for the coming decades. And so we really want you as you're listening to give some consideration uh for being one of these uh champions for religious liberty. Come alongside of us uh join together.  
Yeah. And I know we generally we do this as a church. Uh so if you if you got people that want to do this at a particular church or we have several churches, we'll organize you into groups. Um there are some individual ways we can educate too and and resource you as well, but we're trying to build churches in in support of one another all across the country. And one of the things that you mentioned, you know, people don't understand that government is is is an a not an afterthought. It's it's God's emergency organization. It wasn't in the garden. If you want to talk about the fundamental structures of humanity, church and family are in the garden.  
There you go.  
They're part of God's perfect ordering of things. But when everything gets disordered by sin's entrance into the world, God creates kind of an emergency backs stop for human sinfulness. And that's called government. That's one of the reasons why it's limited. That's one of the reasons why it can't save you because it's a coercive power of God's outward expression of his law that says this far and no farther because human beings can be incredibly sinful and they can do incredibly bad things to one another. And so that's kind of the things the founding fathers understood two things. The dignity of humanity  
which everyone seems to think is so natural but it's really not. But they believed in that and it was rooted in God's creative uh reality of humans. But then the parented sinfulness of humanity. That's what makes America different. They organized our polity by limiting government because they knew all of us were sinful and they even limited their own powers. People don't really understand that's what makes America unique. Utopians don't limit government and monarchs don't limit themselves and tyrants sure don't either. But again, they limited government so that you could be free. And I think that's why religious liberty is so important. talk a little bit about that. And it's not just the first amendment's not in fact the first amendment sometimes is called freedom of speech.  
But people don't understand it was also freedom of religion and freedom of assembly that's guaranteed in the first amendment because the founders believe that religion was that important to the culture. So talk a little bit about why we defend that then.  
Well, it's important is that one of those very first basic rights and a basic probably not you know the correct word. It's a a right that is conferred upon us by God himself.  
Uh it's not something that the government can bestow upon you. But that's one of the great gifts and I like how you said it's one of things that makes America unique. What is James Madison's the one that said that one's conscience is the greatest of all properties.  
And also I think Martin Luther, right, a great reformation figure who said something like to cause someone to go against his or her conscience is the most heinous of sins and that's something that you know whether you're a Christian or not but especially if you're a Christian one has to be very careful as a carer of souls uh something that pastors are are trained to do and blessed to do and we as fellow Christians also in that sense so we live in this time now where uh it seems governing officials and agencies are trying to to reinforce these consciences violations  
yeah I call them secular blast blasphemy laws just so people can really try to understand them because you know we think of religious blasphemy laws. What who would ever want to live in a country that has blasphemy laws? Well, folks, that's what these laws are. They're they're just secular blasphemy laws. Go ahead.  
Yeah. Well, and blasphemy sounds like something evil, doesn't it? Right.  
And we hear that in the gospels when they cry out. That's blasphemy.  
Right.  
Right.  
Well, you know, it's really interesting. You know, one of the things that you talk about too in some of the writings that you're already doing is that you know government is a coercive entity and the founders like you just said they understood that if you and folks I wish you even understood this about the church so many caricatures of the church is that it's a coercive organization it's it's out here to make you do something when in reality the church's proclamation at least the Christian church's proclamation is that God wants you to come to faith in Christ freely that he did all this stuff for you freely and he wants to have a relationship with you freely. Sin is a rebellion against that and he's even calling us to repentance back to a free and healthy relationship with him. And so the founders thought, hey, well, if God wants us to have a a relationship with him freely by grace through faith in this Jesus Christ for all that he's done, well, shouldn't we have a free or a relationship with the government that's similar? And that's one of the reasons why they put the government in its limited place because they thought if if having relationship to God should be a free thing or based on freedom, so shouldn't our relationship even to a coercive entity called the government. And so again, I wish people understood that's what we're losing in the culture in which we live, especially when like you talk about governing officials are trying to now reinforce conscience issues by virtue of law, legal punishments, and the like. All right. Well, can you speak more than to why being a two kingdom citizen is is kind of the best way of aging this. I mean, so we've got this government starting to tell us not only what to do, which I think they have a right to do when we all come up with basic laws like don't run through the stoplight and, you know, stop at the stop sign and drive this way or drive that way. But when they start saying, and this is what you should think and this is what should be in your heart or we're going to punish you, we usually say no. What why is being a two kingdom citizen the best way to address that? Talk about why differentiating our our way of addressing the state and addressing the individual uh conscience, you know, the individual heart or soul. Why those need to be differentiated? Why it's a good way to do that? Well, Jesus reminded us back in Matthew about differentiating the kingdom of how God works in two distinct ways. In Matthew, we hear those who were arguing about the taxes paid to Caesar. And he says, "Come, show me a coin. Whose likeness is whose likeness is on the coin?" And they said, "Caesars's." And Jesus said, "Well, give to Caesar what is Caesar's and give to God what is God and so even in this very verse we see how Jesus himself recognizes that Caesar or the governing authority number one is legitimate just as you had described earlier that is an institute that God has put together an institution that God has provided for us so that humanity can be kept in check gross sinful humanity and so the opportunity for us as two kingdom citizens is to recognize is that that God working in two ways. He works through the governing agencies, which by the way, one of the governing agencies would actually be moms and dads uh as they live out that vocation as we talked about last time. They're in the garden. Uh you know, it was uh the gift of God and family in the midst of that. And so um that uh becomes important for us to realize that as two kingdom citizens, we live both in this world,  
in this temporal world, but we've also been all to his his graces to his glorious world. God's at work both to save for the next world. By the way, we we enjoy that gift of joy of living with him forever, even now because of Christ and what he's done on the death and resurrection. But now he gives us to live also in this temporal world by which through our vocations and our giftedness, we're able then to uh to bless one another.  
Yeah. And you know, I think like you're talking about when you learn to differentiate And and again, differentiating it's it's tough to do because people don't like to have two ideas in their mind. They'd like to have it one way. You know, God does the same thing this way with the church and the same thing with the state. No, he actually works two different ways. He preserves and he saves. And so, you know, we have to keep that in mind that this is his way of doing it. Like you said, Jesus defined this. He's the one who said, "Give to Caesar what is Caesar. Give to God what is God's." And and then he later on told Caesar that he had a limited role when Caesar, you know, when Pilate said, "I can do whatever I want to. He said, "No, you really can't." You know, but I think what it does is it begins to focus our attention properly. We ask the right questions of what the state can do and what the church can do. We ask we have the right expectations. So you don't say to the policeman, "Turn the other cheek." That's not his role. His role is to stand there and say, "You can't go any further than this because this we our civilization would implode and and we give him a limited role in our lives, etc., etc." And I remember and just to kind of add a little bit of sauce to the discussion, I remember I was in a group one day and and everyone was depressed. It was a bunch of evangelical folks who were working on a hill with me and I said, "What's going on?" They said, "Well, we got all these laws passed, but nothing changed."  
And I said to him, I said, "Well, what did you expect?" And and their expectation was the law would create new things. The law somehow uh could transform things. And I I said, "No, no, no. Law never transforms. The law of God just shows us our sin or curbs us from our sinfulness. It's only the gospel or free relationship that transformed something. And so I said, "So you did," they goes, I remember one of the questions. So we did exactly what God wanted us to do. And I said, "Yes, you prevented a lot of bad stuff from happening. But that's all the law can do. And that's why the state can never save." So like you're talking about, if you the minute you start mixing church and state, you start expecting too much of the state or you start creating a coercive church, which now starts to use punishments to bring you to faith, which is never how God wanted that done. So what a beautiful thing then to fight for religious liberty cuz that's keeping the state in its proper place so that the church can actually do its free work the way that God wants it. All right. So you know one of the things we've talked about then is religious liberty and in a lot of ways that is a biblical concept that's been uh finally codified in our day and age. But we defend that. One of the reasons why we defend that so vigorously is that we are defending it for all people. explain that a little bit because there are some people are going to say, "Well, why are you fighting for religious liberty for people who actually are false teachers or people who disagree with you or things like that?" I mean, we're defending that for all people for a reason.  
Well, that what that's the great gift that God gives to us. He doesn't actually coers us to believe in him or we're not uh marinets or puppets on strings by which he's yanking here or there.  
So, we give that same gift to others. We know who we are, you know, as the church. We know where we're headed. And what we want to do is to be able to be the best helpers, the best blockers that are going to help others potentially for the gift to share that good news with them or with others.  
And so we want to extend that same gift that God gives to all people.  
And so for the same reason, we are we work as best we can as his uh ambassadors here uh to be protectors and defenders of all life for at least for what's given here but hopefully for the one that is to come. And so that's important for us as two kingdom citizens is to be able to to be a blessing to to all. Yeah. You know, and to be a defender of the whole uh the whole council of God. I mean, if you look back in the early church, you know, the there's there's always had to be defenders. There's always had to be people who would say, This is the why Jesus is Lord and Caesar is not. You know, there's always had to be uh folks, you know, when people say, "Well, why do you have this view of marriage? Why do you have this view of private property? Thou shalt not steal. Why do you have this view of innocent life?" People don't understand that. There's a book and I've had this Jerry Nukem on my program called What if Christ were what if Jesus were never born? And how so many of the Yeah. So many of the blessings that we have have, you know, where Jesus even turned the the um Oh. This just coming to my mind here. The golden rule. He turned it around from don't do unto others what you don't want them to do to you to do unto others what you wish for them to do. And so, you know, this whole radical change of how we actually can live out our lives towards our neighbor. All of those things and then of course the role of the state in that is just such a beautiful thing to to see how our liberties if we defend those things. It's because we know that God's word has power to to not only defend itself but to actually change hearts. And so we just we just want it out there in the public square. That's what we want. We're defending that. But in order to defend our right to be in the public square, we've got to be willing to defend others for all.  
Yeah. And then pray that people see the the radical difference between the good word of the Lord versus our own words elsewhere. All right. Well, um this Champions for Liberty network, it is here to help And and so I think what I see you're doing and you can kind of correct me if I'm wrong here is that you're taking we've been doing a lot of this work for the sake of the church in DC. We've talked to a lot of people around the country, but you're coming on board to help connect people to each other in ways that we have not done yet. Uh I can already tell you folks, if you become part of this Champions for Liberty network, you're going to be resourced in ways that are going to be a real blessing to you. You're gonna You're going to read things that are going to help you keep it simple, help you actually be able to know when to talk about this around the Thanksgiving table and when not to talk about certain things around the Thanksgiving table, right? And and and you're also going to know about what's coming because maybe a state down the road, you know, is going experiencing this hasn't hit you yet, but you you're with your brothers and sisters experiencing this cuz they're in the Champions for Liberty Network, too. So, talk about why this organizing for action, why it's going to be such a blessing uh to our people.  
I I think it's going to be a gift to our people in the sense that we get to be that extension of who people already are through their churches uh working with pastors, working with teachers, coming alongside and resourcing people for this because I think here's the deal. I think we are probably going to need to be organized for action like we've never been before. I mean, well, you had a you had a guest on your program a while back, Greg, that talked about uh use the analogy of the Marines um who are the small band of people but and they're dropped into a sector and they discover that the uh the enemy fronts are on all sides and I like what he said is ah the enemy can't escape us now cuz they're all around us and I thought that is excellent the sense of where everything seems like uh it's a Goliath and yet as you said a God who's always with us. This is the time for for us to stand up, stand together, and stand in the gap as two kingdom citizens. And the Champions Network is going to be that resource. We hope to connect you with uh more and more people and to see that you are able to be a gift to the church and to your fellow neighbors in ways that maybe they can't even appreciate right now. So, I I think this is going to be outstanding work to come alongside of what you've been doing and what the church has been doing in DC and around the world.  
You know, one of the things and and this comes now after years of doing this and Like I said, you know, Mark is just getting in on on this. Uh, and it's a radical new perspective cuz I I was never trained for this. I dealt with this a lot in New York. I tried to figure out what do I have to do to deal with, you know, the government so that I can launch this preschool? What do I have to do to, you know, with the government to keep them from, you know, shutting this down or shutting that down or what if I run into the ideological differences be between us and the alderman? How do I deal with that without politicizing the church? I I just had to deal with that in New York and had to deal with that in LA. But now we're starting to realize is everywhere. You got to deal with this. And he's coming on board and learning some of these things. Folks, I I'll give you something that I've learned now in in my years of being a church planter in the city and also now defending our churches in DC. The Ten Commandments is what not only did we remove the Ten Commandments from our culture, we remove prayer from our schools and things like that, but the Ten Commandments in many places today is actually by definition hate speech. You just need to understand that. And so, one of the things we're going to teach you and how we we try to simplify these things, show you how these things are working, and then maybe give you ways to respond to it. We're trying to just show you how beautiful even God's law is. Even though God's law shows us our sin, even God's law makes us feel the guilt that we rightfully should feel so that we can come to repentance and faith in Christ. But it's a beautiful thing because it's that one boundary that says, "I will not let you be less than human." You know, if you think about it in those kind of terms we have c a cultural movement today that says you're an animal that you have no intrinsic value that and this is why I said we've been at war with the enlightenment we've been at war with Darwinism we've been at war with these things why because it dehumanizes us and so when you start to say thou shalt not kill because you're valuable honor your father and your mother because that's the first place you learn how to love and to and to actually see that there's something bigger than yourself um thou shalt not bear false witness Why? Because your neighbor's name is is precious to them. You don't have the right to take that away from them just cuz it's easy for you to do or you can make money on it. You know, all these kind of things. You start to think, "Oh, that's a beautiful thing. It takes a lot of work and it's it shows me that I'm out of line with things." But that's what you're you're teaching us how to do that. And then you're organizing churches how to be one more one voice on a lot of these issues in in ways that maybe we have to be now than we had to be before.  
Well said. Simply well said. And so now's the time to get started.  
All right, Mark. Well, we're going to join you, uh, and we're going to support you obviously because we're in this together, you and me. But, uh, we're all I'm out speaking about this stuff all the time, and I know there are people cannot wait to be a part of this. Where should they go to learn more about this? You can easily go to our website, lcrlfreedom.org. lcrfreedom.org. Look for the Champions for Liberty. Uh, page and you can fi you can read some more information about us there and also fill out a contact form and we'll get right back to you again. God bless your work Mark. Thanks for being here today.

## **Part 3**

Listen, let let's get people up to speed. This is this is kind of like watching your favorite series on TV. It's just that you're listening to it on radio. We've been talking Yeah, we've been talking about the Champions for Liberty Network this August. And in during August, we usually talk about uh kind of we kind of have a theme show for the whole month of August. And this month, it's it's on the Champions for Liberty Network. So, we first talked about why why the Champions for Religious Liberty Network. And then we, you know, the state of the vulnerability of people's right of conscience in our culture. And then, you know, we talked about um what a little bit and we'll get even more to the what is this Champions Network next week. So, really stay tuned for that cuz then you're going to really see why this can be a good thing for you. But today, we're going to unpack a little bit more why now. I mean, why do we need this? And and with the issues that we're facing today, there's a lot of us who could have never imagined that we would be dealing with some of these issues where we're forced to say certain things or we're We're being asked to believe certain things even if it's against our conscience or against the clear word of God. And and there's punishments associated with it. They tried to shut down a Catholic charity in Pennsylvania. Why? Because they taught that marriage was between a a man and a woman alone because that's Catholic teaching. And here's a group that had been serving foster kids for a hundred years. And the the Philadelphia City Council decided you're done. You know, so that's the kind of stuff why now and here's the question that I want to unpack a little bit too because this is what I get out on the on the stump is the LCRL is the Lutheran Center for Religious Liberty are are we politicizing things? Are we asking the church to become more political? Why now and why not that?  
Well, it isn't becoming political. We're simply stepping into where God's people are and where our nation our citizens are and we're speaking into that by God's own speaking into these things as we've come to know biblically,  
right?  
God's at work in two ways in our world. Both uh temporally here through the work of families, through the work of government, the state, and he's at work through the church speaking the saving grace of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins. But God has something to say about how uh life is lived out here, those core principles. And uh you and I, we live by them because of him. And so we do have something to say uh to that. So are we making it more political? No. We're trying to take the politics out of that. You know, let me I I'll interject. A topic that had everybody a buzz and I think still is out there, but no one's talking about it again anymore. But the defund the police, I remember when they said, "Well, what's the LCRL's view on this?" And you know, if you were against defunding the police, then they were saying you're for bigotry and you're for hatred. And if you were for it. You were supposed to leave for a new way of thinking about things. And we came into that conversation and it was really interesting cuz I remember when we said again part of what we're going to teach you how to do folks is ask the right questions, what's the role of government? What's the role of family? What's the role of freedom? What's these are the questions that if you don't differentiate these things, you're going to ask the wrong questions and get the wrong answers. And I remember the first thing I said was, "Well, do you guys believe in a police state?" And everyone said, "Why do you No, I don't want Does everyone want a policeman on every corner in every neighborhood? And and if and I said, if you have one of those signs that tells you how fast you're driving, you know, and it said in every street has it and if you you violate the law, you get a ticket sent in the mail, would you want to live in that neighborhood? So, I said, "Hey, I can understand why some people are saying limit the police's role in our neighborhood." I can understand that. But if you limit the police's role in a neighborhood, what role do you have to strengthen? And I said, "Family is in the inverse relationship to need for police. If you have strong families with strong fathers in the home, you need less and less policing because usually the guys that get into trouble are the 14 to 20-year-old boys high on testosterone. We're the kind of we do stupid things when we're in te when we're teenagers. And if our fathers are not there, we will do really bad stuff and get in all kinds of trouble." So I said, "We we understand that if you undergard the uh family and you keep family strong, you won't need as many police and so yeah, maybe you can. You're always going to need some because there's some people that just won't be stopped. So that was our answer. We can understand because we're limited government people who value the the power of the family, but when you got people who defund the police and devalue and destroy the family by politics, you got a problem. And so if we didn't step into that gap, uh we we can see the chaos all over the place. So like you said, we're starting to see the a secularization that hates the church. It hates the family. It hates the ten commandments of God. And it's now starting to use law and policy to actually mute our voices or even tie our hands and drive us out of the public sphere. We're just saying that's bad for the that's bad for our culture period to drive God's voice, his moral preserving voice out of the culture. So again, you know, law and order, all these things, proper place, ask the right questions. This is what the Champions uh network can do. And I think you were talking about this too that we just have people today who are a law unto themselves. Right. I mean that's one of the issues that's becoming a real problem in our culture.  
Yes. Truth is simply in the heart of the beholder. Right.  
Right.  
U you get to make up your own truth. And who are you to tell me even though my truth is probably way out there but who are you to say that tell me that I can't believe in this? Quite frankly where is your source of truth?  
And for you who are the Christians you understand that that source of truth uh and that giftedness comes from God and through the wisdom of his word and uh you and I have something we can share and we can say and speak into that. Um the the problem is is that like you were saying before we tend to be coward into coward into silence. We're afraid I mean I think that's one of the big rudiments is that people are we tend to be afraid. We're fearful. If you're called a hater we tend to step back and that's kind of what a lot of us do.  
Well, you know, and I thought about that. It always reminds me of a time when I was Yeah. when I was young. And I think that's the first thing you say to your parents. You hate me when they say something you don't want. Yeah. I mean, isn't it funny? I mean, every one of us probably did that to our parents. I remember my mom said to me one time, "You'll get over it." You know, because she knew what she was saying was right. She knew it was something that needed to be said cuz I I wasn't honoring it. And she knew that if I didn't honor it, it would be bad for me. So, she had to take that uncomfortable position of saying, "Appreciate the fact that you have this perspective, but you're wrong and I I can't let you be wrong in this case cuz it would be really bad for you." And we've somehow lost that idea that God has that role to play in our lives. And as Christians, I know we're supposed to reflect God's role. Um, and I have this, we wrote a paper called uh by Whose Authority. It's And by the way, folks, um, Pastor Frrith has a lot of these resources for you. Uh, on on the Champions web page uh that that you can go to. But we have these u mom and pop papers and one of them is called by whose authority. And in that regard there's we quote this very public official who basically outlines the fact that the church is a real problem uh that needs to be dealt with in the 21st century. It's a nefarious entity. It brings all these authoritative statements into the public realm that need to be expuned. And I'm telling you, if you don't answer those that challenge. You can't do evangelism because evangelism is a law gospel enterprise. And if God is driven from the public square, if his word is is mocked to the point where we don't even listen, well, it's going to be hard for anybody to hear actually the the beauty of God's law and his gospel. And we're going to teach you how to do that. Well, one of the things that that I was reading some of the things that you had written about for today, and that you were reminding me of some of those very familiar Bible stories, um Esther, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed ago, but I started to ask the question, is America at war with Christianity and its founding? Are we in Babylon?  
Well, I I think you can see some of the seeds thereof that might be there certainly. Um there's a enjoyed a cultural war for the last several decades, maybe forever. I shouldn't say the last few decades, but maybe like uh we haven't seen before that uh people are pushing back on the church. the message of the church because they see the church as the ones who might say no. Pray to God, it's God's no that is being spoken,  
right?  
Um on on this issue or that one. But yes, I mean just like uh Esther and Daniel, Shadrach, the apostles, others, there were times when uh there was great push back on them and yet they knew who they were. They knew that they had been called made and redeemed in God in Christ Jesus. And they stood up knowing that it would be a blessing to others. Well, you know, it's funny, too. Um the the Bible teaches us that we're supposed to, and again, we're using the word Caesar as a placeholder for government. Um America did something that has never been done before, folks. It put it turned it all upside down because a lot of people think of Caesar on the top and you're on the bottom. Individual citizen on the bottom. The the United States turned that upside down and it put you on the top, your Caesar, if you will, and and good governance uh supports your right to to be the citizen God called you to be. Um well, that I mean that's that's a a powerful powerful uh reality. That means you you supposed to live out this citizenship because God has truly truly blessed you with it. But again, when you're talking about this stuff, salt and light, uh getting to understand that even if even if things are cascading, you know, downward right now. It it only makes the light of Christ shine more brightly into the middle of this. But we're called to be two kingdom citizens. We're we're called to even do the civilizing work or the cultural work that God would have us do uh as well. So, um why is this challenge um not just important for us? And I think this is maybe the one thing that our gr I'm seeing a lot of grand uh parents tell me this. They're worried about their children. They're worried about growing up, their kids growing up in a civil society, in a humane society, and even in a god-fearing society. And they're seeing all of that kind of being eroded in the institutions that we cherish. And they're saying, "Shouldn't we fight back there?" Why is this not just important for us, but why is this also important for our children and for our grandchildren?  
Well, as we were talking before the program, when you don't have children and the aspect of you know families are much smaller and if children come into the mix uh for mix for a couple they're coming in often times later in life and so when you don't have that next generation or a couple of generations coming up from behind you I guess I think you were the one that was saying you said you people start to think well what's the use  
yeah what's a well you know who said it actually it was Elon Musk I mean I I just heard him say it now I you know, I I I agree with the sentiment. Um I'm I'm not sure he's the moral voice to say that, but but what he said was um one of the reasons why people don't care about a lot of these issues, they don't have any kids. So, if they don't have any kids, what's the point? They've got theirs is the point. You know, and you're hearing a lot of people say today, I want a good job. I want to be able to travel, and I don't want children. Well, it's a it's a different mindset when you say, I don't want the responsibility of of bringing children into the world and then raising them up and and forming them. I don't want any of that responsibility. And so it goes to how we then look at even things like religious liberty, sanctity of life, all of these different kinds of things because whatever encumbrances, whatever, you know, gets in my way of my own selfexpression now becomes something I'm fighting against. Where you and I both know that a lot of us grew up the minute we became a dad. A lot of us grew up when we got married. You know, that's when we started to realize, uh, I've got bigger responsibilities than just doing what I wish. And isn't that really the issue? Kind of back to what we're talking about today. By whose authority? Maybe even the book of Numbers in the Old Testament. Everyone's just doing what's right in their own eyes and demanding that the government punish anybody who gets in our way. That's just not a society you can really live in.  
No, that's that is just it. Uh,  
but but our kids can't live in that society either because it's going to only get worse unless someone stands in the way. So, what is what is our special calling today for just such a time as this? Right. You make a good point. I recently saw a brand new dad, first time dad, and uh always he was a, you know, just a great young buck, but you know, now suddenly he's got this little baby in his arms and his entire perspective changed. You're absolutely right about this and how has become the great protector. Prior to that was always the one that was always kind of pushing the limits, you know, and now it's like, well, wait a minute here. So, that perspective is spot on. It's for them. However,  
maybe not just well, it is for those children, grandchildren to come, but what about the others who are suffering right now in our midst who's going to stand up with them today?  
And you don't have to look very far. Uh we, you know, certainly you can cross the websites that come about. There's people that are fighting this alliance defining defending freedom versus liber Institute. Oh my goodness. Uh every week I discover a new one of those and I'm amazed by uh the world that they open up to you. Thank the good Lord that there are people like you, Dr. Seltz, and others as you've been going ahead of this for, you know, the last seven, eight years specifically, but the others who've been there helping and walking along alongside of people. What did um I listened in one of your interviews of uh I think it was I think it was Lorie Smith and you asked her, "How are you doing? How can we be praying for you?"  
Right?  
And she said, "Man, it's been tough. It's been hard." And I can only imagine, you might you might know this. I don't know if she's been able to continue on with her business while she's fighting this lawsuit or not, but the rest of us who maybe are just we're doing our own thing day in and day out, punch a time card, go to work, punch out, go home. Um, all of that's important, too. But How often do we actually, you know, literally check the headlines and then take those headlines to our prayers, you know, that evening with our family?  
Well, and you know, let me I can jump in on this, too, cuz Jack Phillips was a guy that we went and visited him, went to his place of business. Then I ran into him at a couple times at at uh conferences where he was speaking and he came and talked to us and it was really tough because he started to cry.  
Um, and you know, he had just won this victory. We thought, oh, all you want. And the the people that are after him, they're they're relentless. They are coming and coming and coming. And he looked out at us and he said, "Now they're coming after my family. They're coming after my children." And he said, you know, it's just gotten to the point he's he almost lost his business two or three times. And he said one time to to us that day, he said, "Yeah, when we make headlines, people I get a lot of attention, but then that attention goes away and I feel like I'm all by myself, you know, facing this." Obviously, he said, "I know I'm not." He said, "But boy, it sure comforts me. when people take time to say something, take time to write something, to pray. And so, you're right, even our champions for liberty will be on top of some of these things because sometimes I'll won't realize this is happening in this state or in that state. And then you'll your champions people will say, "This is what we're fighting right now." And and you can even just join in the prayers of that as well as standing in the gap with people. One of the things that I love what you said and I I I've not said it this way, so maybe we should kind of wordsmith this out too. I like how you said speak into that. Speak the word into that. That's really all we're trying to do. We're just trying to be useful to God to get his word into the situation. And if it's a situation where God's preserving law is called for, you know, there can be no just law that violates the Ten Commandments. It just can't be because God is the one who created us. He's the one who ordered us. CS Lewis said there cannot be a new uh fundamental color or a new fundamental moral any more than there can be a new fundamental color because God created the colors of of of light, you know, the Roy G. BIV. So, again, you can you can mix them, you can match them, but the fact is is that there's still God's way of doing things that finally calls us to account. And I'm just saying, I love how you said all we're trying to do is get out of the way or be authentic voices. We know we're just as sinful as everybody else. That's not the, you know, we're speaking his yes, his no on his terms. You know, that's the key. But we're being browbeaten into thinking that even God doesn't have a right. to say what he has to say. And I think that's the whole issue. By whose authority we even become fools for Christ when we finally say, "Well, this is what he has to say about that and we're going to stand here." Um, so I love how you talked about that. It's it's for our kids, our grandkids, but you just said it right. It's for the people who need it right now. And so if you don't have any kids, I interviewed one of our own pastors who he he said we didn't think we could have children. And Paul Deonte said, "So we started foster caring and we started adopting and and and Tony Dunie, I met Tony Dunie uh at the Walk for Life and he's got 11 children. He had three and then he's they adopted eight more. You know, I just thought, okay, so if you don't have the benefit of of being able to have your own children, I just get into the mix and realize that families are the foundational structure to a civil society. All right, last thing. And it's been fun talking to you about this, Mark, and I can't wait to see what what the church does with you on this champions network. Uh isolation I do think is our greatest enemy. Yeah, we gather to and we gather to hear God's word. That's one of the reasons why the Bible says don't give up gathering. You cannot have internet church replace regular church because uh Christ came in flesh and he needs to have his body uh be together. Um but what is one of this? This is one way where I think the network is going to help us so that we don't feel like we're all by ourselves and so talk finally a little bit about how the network's going to be designed to do that.  
Well, we'll you you said you'd invite me on next week again.  
Yeah, I guess we'll talk more about the particular  
about the rudiments of that so you can see the story, but I think yeah know just to speak to it very briefly at least that yolked together there's more we can do together than we can ever do apart and uh well each you know and our congregations do that and uh often times our well for our tribe at least. We're linked together in a a Senate denomination and and that's a a great blessing. But we're talking about doing work and standing into the gap and doing things that we haven't done a lot of. Not going to say it was absent. The church has spoken when it's need to have spoken. But here's the opportunity where we can band together. And I think for uh those of us who are are leoty, there's something we can do for our pastors. We've often over the last couple years, last few years worried about what's going to happen to our pastors if these, you know, secular laws go in that, you know, see the church as being nefarious, you know, and if our pastor preaches the wrong thing and it's recorded  
because everything now is being recorded. What's going to happen to him? It's time to come alongside of your pastors also  
um and uh bolster them, shore them up. We're not doing something apart from the pastors in our work together. We're like the extension of that work. Uh especially as uh witnesses, but now also as especially as two kingdom citizens in that way. So coming together, we'll beworked together, we'll be stronger together, we'll be able to talk to each other uh and support each other in this very very important work of uh being two kingdom citizens.  
Yeah, I like that. You know, folks, the Bible's very clear on this. God's the one who gives us different gifts. Um same Lord and and so we need to learn how to cherish the uniqueness and the unique responsibilities and opportunities. Some more more than likely the kind of work that we do blocking it's a lay lay Christians who are not the pastoral voice the the ultimately the voice of God's forgiveness in Christ. They're not the ones who we want them to talk about the moral issues. Don't get me wrong. I'm not saying that because they have to preach the whole council of God. But when it comes to interjecting or intersecting with the world, it's the it's lay people, lay men, lay women, doctors, lawyers, entre entrepreneurs, nurses, you could deal with all these silly laws or these restrictions and you know how to deal with that and still do your vocation. Moms and dads, education, being on school boards, all this kind of stuff. We will give you the resources to do that. And then we'll connect you to one another because we are stronger together. And I will tell you this, when I go speak to a congressman or a senator, they always ask me, "Who do I represent?" And I can tell you right now, if you join our word from the center just Bible study and Friday oped piece, where you will just deliver it to you via email or if you start to join this Champions for Liberty network with your churches and things like that. I go into those places and say this is whose voice I'm here to talk about and obviously it's the LCMS church that I represent. But if I've got people signed up following me, I walk in and say I got 100,000 people who get our our weekly email. I got churches all over the country that are connected to this network. They stand up and they listen because that's what constituency does. on the hill. Well, that's the power of this growing network. All right, Mark. Well, thanks again. We'll talk more about the actual network next week, but God bless your work and thanks for being here today.  
Thank you very much, Greg. God bless you.

## **Part 4**

Greg, thank you very much. Appreciate being back with you again today.  
You know, and like I've said before and we've taken this whole month to kind of break this It's really important. We're trying to not just give people resources. We're not trying to just uh make people aware of the the politics that affects the church and why it needs to be at least addressed for the sake of mission and ministry. This is a network of support. This is a network uh where people not only learn but they can learn with each other and they can realize that they're not alone. So this network uh this Champions for Liberty network is really really important because it teaches the church, how to be the church in the public square ultimately for the sake of its mission. So, uh your work is a very very very important thing and folks if you do want to get to know about this network, it's worth your time. So, let's let's just jump right in. Describe the network uh for our listeners. Uh sure. Very good, Greg. So, in terms of the network, we've kind of broken it up into kind of three areas, if you will. There's kind of like three main components. um what I call the two kingdom academy that's the learn learn learning compo uh uh compartment uh we've got the champions church the individual congregations and the networks thereof and that brings up the third part which is really the network itself it's a network of churches and two kingdom citizens individuals who maybe if their church isn't active right now in in the network uh they can join and be linked together with other folks so  
yeah let me stop you before you even describe that further two kingdoms. Folks, what we mean by this and and a lot of times people don't understand Jesus is the one who differentiates the church in the state or the preserving work of God um through Caesar through family through through you know structures that are built into nature. He's the one who differentiates. He says give to Caesar what is Caesars's give to God what is God's and he differentiates God's work through that. And all we're talking about here is is this we call it the left-hand kingdom work of God. Two kingdom citizenship is how do we get involved in God's preserving work which he does through all people even through non-Christians how do we get involved in that for the sake of God's saving work which is to proclaim what Jesus has done for everybody so keep it simple God's the one who differentiates his work not us uh he preserves he saves we just need to learn how to differentiate that and also be useful in his hands in each area so that's what this network is about that's what your academy is about right teaching about how to how to be that teaching how the how the Lord describes that and then how to apply that in your life. Right.  
I really like how you you uh said that. Yes. God is always engaging. Right. Right.  
And the and the amazing thing is he uh calls us into his uh two kingdom engagement system platform.  
Yeah. You know the I read Francis Schaefer a long time ago and Francis Schaefer used to in one of his books he said the God who is there and because so many people think God is absent. today that God is, you know, he's disconnected from human affairs. And we even go further. We say who the God who's continuing to act and uh but you differentiate his actions. You know, he doesn't act to save differently than he did through Jesus Christ. That for once and for all time, but he's still out there preserving the world through all kinds of things so that people can hear about his saving work. Now, in that two kingdom citizen track, you talk about a few principles. Let's just dive into a couple of those pretty quickly uh because those are found This is what people will learn, right?  
Well, that's it. I think you've already kind of uh enumerated on one of those and that's one of those principles is dynamic differentiation where you talk about, you know, the left-hand kingdom and the right-hand kingdom, if you will, and how God engages the world. Maybe a second principle would then be uh reformation restraint or uh reformation restraint, seeking the truth, which importantly reminds us as his people that he's at work even when we can't see it in the midst of the chaos. of the moment that we find ourselves today. So, as Christians, we may see something go on a foul and we want to jump in. We want to make a difference, right?  
Uh the two kingdom citizen though he or she's going to engage importantly just a little bit hesitantly and that's kind of the nature of the church. We're always looking to see if God is already working through that situation for good even in his left-hand kingdom. And it reminds us that God can use people, even sinful people, unbelievers even to set about bounds and corrections, if you will. So, we need to ask, is this something that is God calling me to engage in right now or not,  
right?  
We want to be totally passive, but we need to be uh somewhat restraint in that.  
Yeah. Let me let me jump in with that. The first one, dynamic differentiation, like you said, jump in. Um too often Lutheran get accused of being passive, you know, passive on these things where since we supposedly divide up God's work, so therefore we we say, "Well, that's not really the important work. This pres oberving stuff that's for other people to do. In reality, it's just we jump in. We differentiate, but we jump in. It's dynamic differentiation. And then like you said, the second one is but when we jump in, we realize, well, God could be preserving this place uh through a whole lot of things that I don't really see and I better get to know that. And that's one of the ways we get to know a neighborhood even as we serve it. We we don't jump in and say, "I already know what you need." We jump in and ask a lot of questions. Uh the third one, which is probably the most important one today because there's busy bodies everywhere. Uh describe this thing called vocational respect seeking the truth. Yes. Very good. There we're reminded of God's moral law. Uh the law that curbs sin and sinfulness and how he orders creation for good. He even here in the left-hand kingdom for the sake of his work with the church in the right hand kingdom. So we think through we want to think through in this uh principle um the very special role of the church as well as the special role of good and limited government. So the lady of the church have a very special role then as what we call two kingdom citizens as they're empowered to live out their Christian faith through the myriad of vocations that they may be called into into this world. Right? The importance of the family to God, the role of good and limited government, the importance of vocation of work, of property, and  
really the u uh sanctified use of monetary resources, you know, so  
good stuff.  
Yeah.  
Yeah. And I and and you know, like you were saying about vocations, you know, and the myriad of things that the leoty uh can be a part of. And when we again, folks, leoty just means you as Christians, you know, out there in your individual work,  
the people,  
the people. But you know, it it's funny because vocations, this is one of the we don't we don't always demand that the state define vocations. You know, like right now, we're having a big issue with marriage out in the culture and there are people saying we want to legally tell you what marriage is and you better uh rise to that. We in our work in DC we're just saying keep the government out of it. We're that's all we're fighting to do. We're fighting to depoliticize that. Well, now that we've depoliticized it, now we do need to talk about the benefits of honor your father and your mother. It's still going to be a unique message. We're going to talk about why God organized families the way he did and why we need to honor families and why we need to honor the way he orders things. It may not save us, but it can civilize us and and so again that's where the church can be a cultural voice for the sake of the culture and and you also talk about developing leaders the two kingdom leader track leaders this is Christians who kind of start to rise to the occasion and then be develop skill sets that can really bless right are we talking about uh helping to enhance that talk about the two kingdom leader track  
oh right so uh leaders are always learning right so in our in our work academy if the the first couple of years. Boy, that sounds like it's a long time, doesn't it?  
Goes fast. Oh, it you're absolutely right. Time flies, but it's important that we work through this incrementally. So, our leader track, you know, a lot of people are probably going to work through those uh first couple of modules and um you know, God has called them into doing, you know, their work and their vocations and they'll be satisfied with that. But then we're going to need leaders who will continue to uh uh support their work uh in the church and uh in the world. So uh our two kingdom leader track takes those individuals who feel called to learn more, study more, be more just in the work that we're getting to do here in lefthand kingdom work. We always need more people. So that second leader, second track is, you know, specifically for those individuals who would love to to dive deeper and maybe even be more instrumental and helpful uh in on a larger scale on a larger front maybe in the state in the other communities maybe even at the federal level come alongside of you Greg  
right you know so again we're all in this together folks and now one of the things again I use this metaphor I think we've talked about it in previous programs I use this metaphor that this is like on a football team um evangelists are the ones who score okay so when you score the touchdown so it might be the quarterback the wide receiver the running back they score the touchdown score the touchdown score the touchdown share the gospel. The people we're training are the offensive linemen, for lack of a better term. We block every play. All our job is to do is to block nefarious things that could get in the way of sharing that gospel or what I'd like to say, put our temporal liberties to work for the sake of proclaiming the eternal liberties of God and Christ. And and again, we're just saying to you folks, if you have that affinity, that's a godly work, too. It it may not be you may not be the one in the touchdown sharing the gospel. Maybe that's not even your gift, but you may be the one that blocked the legislation that was going to prevent us from sharing the gospel. And that's really something that I think Lutheran are starting to realize, hey, that's our responsibility, too. We can't just leave that to other churches or other people. So, again, this is a great way for you to get involved. And if you even want to u grow in this, this network that's an online network is there to train you. It's there to equip you. It's there to support you and to connect you. All right. So, describe the process, the opportunity a little bit more uh in depth for people.  
Sure, Greg. Um, thank you for that. So, you know, we always kick off our process with uh kind of an inaugural set of presentations. We call it a champions weekend. Most often this happens in our congregations or it's set for congregations where you give a chance just to invite people to hear and to listen. You know, what does it mean dynamic? differentiation. What does it mean that God works in two distinct ways in his left-hand kingdom and right-hand kingdom? And so this kind of this kickoff weekends really uh works really really well from there. Then I won't go into a lot of detail about that particular weekend, but that just sets the stage. Following that, we'd love to raise up, you know, in your congregation a small group of of leaders that will help move this process down the road and maybe we start the champions uh academy uh network stuff right in your congregation. So, we'll come alongside and help you to raise up those uh few individuals. You know, many hands make for light work. And so, you know your community and you know your church well. And we just want to equip you to do that and set you up for uh the first year in the academy process to learn what does it mean to be a a two kingdom citizen. And so, we call the UEIE in that first year really two kingdom apprentices if we were where you somebody comes alongside of you uh like ourselves to begin with and you're raising up people within your own congregation to do just that also. And so after you finish that first year, uh, and in that process, you've probably worked through eight or nine little study modules, you've probably read a couple of books, uh, and you've had good conversations in that first year. You'll do some limited engagement in your community. Uh, and I know Greg, you really feel strongly about that, and I do too, that you take time to get into your community and just listen,  
walk about out. Pray for the people that you see. What are you seeing? Ultimately, so that you, you know, listen to people so that you earn the right to visit with them and for them actually to listen to who you are and your stake as a two kingdom citizen. So, um, in that first um, as two kingdom citizens, the academy, this really lines up in about two years, but I like what you said, Greg. It goes by fast. There's so much to learn and I think you'll enjoy the cont. content and you'll enjoy the group interaction when it comes to that. So, um uh as a champions church then uh after that first year uh you get all the re the uh the benefits and the resources that uh the Lutheran Center for Religious Liberty affords you and that's an ever growing group of resources is it not Greg?  
It is because uh like I said when we when we're doing our work here on the hill especially with the radio program and visiting and all those different kind of things we're then bringing those resources back to you. And of course, we're writing about these things and applying these things uh to kingdom citizenship to these issues that you're dealing with. We're showing you how to engage this. And let me just say what you were just talking about. You know, it's an incredible thing. First, you learn about it and you go, "Oh, I didn't even know we thought this way." But then you start to apply it. And that's why you need to take some time, folks, because I I just want to tell and for you pastors out there who who invite us in, we're the ones who are going to depoliticize these things for you. Uh we're not the ones politicizing everything and we're not teaching your people to become activists. Uh we're teaching them to become anti-activist activists.  
Just made that phrase up. Okay.  
You know advocates.  
Yeah. Exactly. I what I'm trying to say is, you know, when we finally deal with the Caesar side of things and God's preserving work, we're just telling Caesar to stay in his place.  
And a lot of times, even if like in the marriage issue, one of the things you'll learn how to do is you'll learn how to take the politics out of it. And what I mean mean by that is you'll be saying uh to the state this isn't your business. So I don't we might have disagreements with people in our neighborhoods about what is marriage okay and we have to we have to engage that dialogically uh for the sake of our mission but really there are people saying we're going to shut that conversation down and you either have to believe this way or that way and we're saying no to that. So that's where we get involved and we fight the government saying uh you can't talk your way. We're saying well yes we can and so we'll we'll teach people how to push back then air, but that's really taking politics out of it. That's trying to tell the state, "Mind your business so we can be good neighbors even to those with whom we disagree." And we're going to teach you how to do that, folks. See, that's that's the problem. Everyone's like, "Well, we we need to learn how to do that." Well, this is the way you do that. And one of the reasons why it takes about a year to go through this is we'll teach you the principles, but then when you start to apply it, that's where it gets a little tough. And you need to actually prayerfully ask yourself, was that a a good way to do it? Was that a bad way to do it. Did I think through it properly? And that takes time and it takes conversation uh with others as well. All right. Well, I I think this is exciting. I think this is one of the great blessings of the Lutheran Center for Religious Liberty. And you know, I will even say this. You know, anyone can host one of these events. We'll come out and talk to pretty much anybody about how to do this kind of stuff. So, you you don't have to be a Lutheran church per se to have a Champions for Liberty um network weekend. But this is especially designed for the churches we represent on the hill and we're a rep we're an agency of the LCM of the Lutheran Church of Missouri Senate. So again, there's a lot of benefits to this. There's a lot of wisdom. Even if you're an individual wants to grow and and figure out how to be a part of uh of kind of a team of people that is engaging these cultural issues, political issues for the sake of the culture and for the sake of the church will teach you how to be a part of that. So there's a lot of benefits. But I don't think I've described them all. Talk about some of the benefits if you just jump into something like this. Well, uh, Greg, you just reminded me of one as I kind of listed a number of the benefits for my, uh, for our talk here today. But you talked about pastors being afraid. And sometimes pastors feel like this is kind of an end around them, but it's not. Uh, we so appreciate what our pastors and our teachers are doing through the work of the church and through the work of our schools. Um, and we definitely want our pastors to be involved in what's going on. We want them to even be a strong component of this, but for the sake of uh our people, for the leoty, you know, that you give them a role to come alongside of you and be those blockers as you so eloquently.  
Yeah. Well, let me jump let me jump in and just say if you're a quarterback, you know, think of the pastor as a quarterback. If you're a quarterback, your favorite people on the field are the linemen.  
Exactly. The ones who don't get any name recognition.  
They don't get any They're always on their back. They're always blocking and even when you score, uh, they they get no recognition. And I'm just saying, you know, if you talk to any quarterbacks, they'll they'll tell you those are my most important people. Well, what we're trying to do is show that that's also God's work. A lot of times people don't think blocking is God's work. Yes, good good government, yes, some of these civil cultural things, they don't save us, but they preserve us. They prevent us from go. Human beings can be really bad. We can do horrendous things to each other. And so God actually puts these kinds of preservative things into his culture to protect, to preserve, to civilize. And Christians can be a part of that for the sake of the gospel. So folks, that's one of the benefits is learning why that's important, learning how it supports the mission and ministry of the church. And I think that's one of the really the great takeaways is pastors are going to find out that they've got a whole team of people, those who are evangelizing with them but those who are preserving and protecting uh the church's work for that sake too and that's beautiful some of the other benefits well so it really complements the uh right-hand kingdom work of the church right you you have the opportunity to come and learn and better understand the role of the church for the sake of the community you you then get to also understand how God sees and supports the role of government uh among you your community your state your federal level uh you're going to gain appreciation for a renewed appreciation for the importance of family and education, sanctity of life, and of course you talk a lot about religious liberty in our country, in our world, uh, Greg, on your program and in your work. Um, and so all that comes along with this, you discover what does it mean to be a two kingdom citizen then and how do as God engages the world, how do I get to engage the world as he calls me? You mentioned earlier also how you'll discover how you can be helpful and depolic criticizing many of the issues that people are so become so emotionally charged today.  
You'll develop God's biblical two kingdom mindset and how to engage. And then you're just going to resource yourself better and how you can better support your congregation, your pastor, your teachers for the important work that they're given to do in preaching and teaching the gospel, the gospel that saves people through the gift of Jesus Christ. And that becomes important because it would seem as I listen to your programs, Greg, how you point out how society is becoming becoming even more hostile towards the church,  
you know, and this is not unusual and maybe and it's unusual in America because America has always had of a place in its heart for religion and religious liberty. I mean, it's foundational to our constitutional freedoms. Uh people don't realize how unique that is in the world because uh when Jesus says, "Give to Caesar what is Caesars's," I I always kind of lament a little bit. He should have said, "Give to Caesar what is Caesars's." And only what is Caesar's. And actually, the rest of the Bible kind of describes what Caesar's supposed to do and what he's not supposed to do. In fact, for those of you out there, I I'll just throw a little bit of a cheeky thing in here. You know, the whole notion of benevolent government, that's actually a Christian heresy. The notion that the government's supposed to do benevolence work and no, the government's a coercive agency. It's supposed to protect and that's its basic work undergirling citizenship, being a good referee. Benevolence is your work. Benevolence is free people getting together to serve those in need. Those kinds of things. And again, we'll talk about why the notion of benevolent government is so huge today. It's because that's a government that takes the place of the church and that's a very secular way to move. So again, give to Caesar what is Caesar isn't only what is Caesars because that's not where God saves. And that's the kind of thing you're going to learn how to say, "Oh, we don't have a thus sayaeth the Lord there about Caesar." And we can learn to agree to disagree on these things. But we do have a few thus sayeth the Lord's even for Caesar and that's where the church needs to learn to stand. So beautiful stuff. I love what you're doing developing this network. I think we're going to have you on from time to time just to talk about how this network is growing and how it's supporting one another. I have churches that call me all the time that are saying please help. Please help. But we come alongside to help individual churches. But this network will be churches helping churches and people helping churches. It won't just be our well it's our work obviously. in this network, but suddenly you're going to have a group of people. I know right now in Michigan, they're dealing with some real issues and there are churches in Ohio that dealt with the same issues and so they can say, "Hey, we dealt with this. Here's how we went about it or here's how we prayed through it." And that's what this network can and will do for you. So again, last word on this, Mark, where can they find out more about the Champions for Liberty Network? Let's just start off by saying just go to our website, lcrlfreedom.org, and There you'll find the Champions for Religious Liberty tab. You can complete that very simple sign up page for more information and we'll get back to you pronto. Yeah, I think folks just jump in on this one. There's two ways you can get involved. Get get to know us. One of them one of them is just sign up for our word from the center. We have a Monday devotion, a Friday oped on from a two kingdom perspective on a lot of issues. That's an easy way and you can go to our website again lcrlfreedom.org and sign up for that. But the next way to jump in is this champion network and that weekend is something else. You know, freedom is a biblical idea. It's not an American ideal. I mean, it is in America, but it was first a biblical idea. Jesus says it is for freedom that you have been set free. He sets you free to live freely in him for others. And America got a glimpse of that and actually applied it to its government, too. And that's a good thing. You're going to learn all about a lot of that kind of stuff in here. And then you're going to learn how to be able to put it to practice. So, thank you for your work, Mark. Thank you for for your leadership and we will talk again soon.  
